= George Floyd =\nGeorge Perry Floyd Jr. (October 14, 1973 – May 25, 2020) was a black American man killed during an arrest after allegedly passing a counterfeit $20 bill in Minneapolis. A white police officer, Derek Chauvin, knelt on Floyd's neck for nearly eight minutes.
After his death, protests against police violence toward black people quickly spread across the United States and internationally. Born in Fayetteville, North Carolina, Floyd grew up in Houston, Texas. He played football and basketball throughout high school and college.
He held several jobs, and he was also a hip hop artist and a mentor in his religious community. Between 1997 and 2005, he was convicted of eight crimes; in 2009, he accepted a plea bargain for a 2007 aggravated robbery, serving four years in prison.
In 2014, he moved to the Minneapolis area, finding work as a truck driver and a bouncer. In 2020, he lost his security job during the COVID-19 pandemic.
== Early life and education ==\nFloyd was born on October 14, 1973 in Fayetteville, North Carolina to George Perry and Larcenia "Cissy" Jones Floyd. He had four siblings.
Floyd's parents separated and, when he was two, his mother moved with the children to the Cuney Homes public housing, known as Bricks, in Houston's Third Ward, a historic black neighborhood and one of the poorest areas of the city.
Floyd was called Perry as a child, but also Big Floyd: being over six feet tall in middle school, he saw sports as a vehicle for improving his life.
At Yates High School, Floyd played on the basketball team as a power forward, and as tight end on the football team, helping lead them to the Texas state championships in 1992; he graduated in 1993.
He made the varsity football team as a ninth grader; in tenth grade he was also co-captain of the basketball team.
The first of his siblings to go to college, Floyd attended South Florida Community College for two years on a football scholarship, and also played on the basketball team.
He transferred to Texas A&M University–Kingsville in 1995, where he also played basketball before dropping out. Friends and family called him Perry, and characterized him as a "gentle giant". He was 6 feet 4 inches (193 cm) tall and weighed 223 pounds (101 kg).
== Later life ==\nFloyd returned to Houston from college in Kingsville, Texas in 1995 and became an automotive customizer and played club basketball. Beginning in 1994, he performed as a rapper using the stage name Big Floyd in the hip hop group Screwed Up Click.
The New York Times described his deep-voiced rhymes as "purposeful", delivered in a slow-motion clip about "'choppin' blades' – driving cars with oversize rims – and his Third Ward pride".
Between 1997 and 2005, Floyd was sentenced to jail terms eight times on various charges, including drug possession, theft and trespass. In 2009, he was sentenced to five years in prison for armed robbery in a home invasion and was paroled in January 2013.
After Floyd's release, he became more involved with Resurrection Houston, a Christian church and ministry, where he mentored young men. He helped his mother recuperate after a stroke.
He delivered meals and assisted on other projects with Angel By Nature Foundation, a charity founded by rapper Trae tha Truth.
Later he became involved with a ministry that brought men from the Third Ward to Minnesota in a church-work program with drug rehabilitation and job placement services. In 2014, Floyd moved to Minneapolis to find work.
He was a truck driver and a bouncer, and lived in St. Louis Park. In 2017, he filmed an anti-gun violence video. From 2017 to 2018, he was a security guard for a Salvation Army facility.
In 2019, George Floyd worked security at the El Nuevo Rodeo club, where police officer Derek Chauvin also worked off-duty as a security guard. In 2020, Floyd lost his security job at a bar and restaurant affected by the COVID-19 pandemic rules.
That April, he contracted COVID-19, and recovered after a few weeks. Floyd had five children, including two daughters (aged 6 and 22 at the time of his death) in Houston and an adult son in Bryan, Texas. A former partner lives in Houston with his youngest daughter.
He also had two grandchildren. A GoFundMe account to defray Floyd's funeral costs and benefit his family broke the site's record for number of individual donations.
== Death ==\nOn May 25, 2020, Floyd was arrested after allegedly passing a counterfeit $20 bill at a grocery store in the Powderhorn Park neighborhood of Minneapolis.
He died after Derek Chauvin, a white police officer, pressed his knee to Floyd's neck for nearly eight minutes during the arrest.
Floyd was handcuffed face down in the street, while two other officers further restrained Floyd and a fourth prevented onlookers from intervening. 6:24 During the final two minutes, Floyd was motionless and had no pulse.
Though the officers called for medical assistance, they took no action to treat him. 6:46 Chauvin kept his knee on Floyd's neck as emergency medical technicians arrived.
7:21 The later official autopsy report classified Floyd's death as a homicide attributed to cardiopulmonary arrest caused by subdual and restraint.
A second autopsy, commissioned by Floyd's family and performed by Michael Baden, without access to various tissue and fluid samples, found that the "evidence...
is consistent with mechanical asphyxia as the cause" of death, with neck compression restricting blood flow to the brain, and back compression restricting breathing.
Some experts have theorized positional asphyxia. After Floyd's death, protests were held globally against the use of excessive force by police officers against black suspects and lack of police accountability.
Protests began in Minneapolis the day after his death and developed in over 400 cities throughout all 50 U.S. states and internationally.
== Memorials and legacy ==\nSeveral memorial services were held. On June 4, 2020, a memorial service for Floyd took place in Minneapolis with Al Sharpton delivering the eulogy.
Services were planned in North Carolina with a public viewing and private service on June 6 and in Houston on June 8 and 9. Floyd was buried next to his mother in Pearland, Texas.
Colleges and universities which have created scholarships in Floyd's name include North Central University (which hosted a memorial service...
for Floyd),Alabama State, Oakwood University,Missouri State University, Southeast Missouri State, Ohio University,Buffalo State College, Copper Mountain College, and others.
Amid nationwide protests over Floyd's killing, Netflix CEO Reed Hastings and his wife Patty Quillin made a $120 million donation to be split equally among Morehouse College, Spelman College and the United Negro College Fund.
The donation was the largest ever made to historically black colleges and universities. Street artists globally created murals honoring Floyd. Depictions included Floyd as a ghost in Minneapolis, as an angel in Houston and as a saint weeping blood in Naples.
A mural on the International Wall in Belfast commissioned by Festival of the People (Féile an Phobail) and Visit West Belfast (Fáilte Feirste Thiar) features a large portrait of Floyd above a tableau showing Chauvin kneeling...
on Floyd's neck while the three other officers turn their backs and each covers his eyes, ears, or mouth in the manner of the Three Wise Monkeys ("See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil").
The Houston mural is on the side of Scott Food Mart in the Third Ward. By June 6, murals had been created in many cities, including Manchester, Dallas, Miami, Idlib, Los Angeles, Nairobi, Oakland, Strombeek-Bever, Berlin, Pensacola, and La Mesa.
A bill proposed by US Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, the George Floyd Law Enforcement Trust and Integrity Act, was designed to reduce police brutality and establish national policing standards and accreditations.
The length of time that Chauvin was initially believed to have had his knee on Floyd's neck, eight minutes forty-six seconds, was widely commemorated as a "moment of silence" to honor Floyd.
= Killing of George Floyd =\nOn May 25, 2020, George Floyd, a 46-year-old black American man, was killed in Minneapolis, Minnesota, during an arrest for allegedly using a counterfeit bill.
Derek Chauvin, a white police officer, knelt on Floyd's neck for almost eight minutes while Floyd was handcuffed and lying face down, begging for his life and repeatedly saying "I can't breathe". Officers J.
Alexander Kueng and Thomas Lane further restrained Floyd, while officer Tou Thao prevented bystanders from intervening.
6:24 During the final two minutes, Floyd was motionless and had no pulse while Chauvin ignored onlookers' pleas to remove his knee, which he did not do until medics told him to.
7:30 The following day, after videos made by witnesses and security cameras became public, all four officers were fired. Two autopsies found Floyd's death to be a homicide.
Chauvin was initially charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter, to which was later added second-degree murder; the three other officers were charged with aiding and abetting second-degree murder.
Floyd's death triggered subsequent protests against police brutality, police racism, and lack of police accountability.
In early June, the Minneapolis City Council took action to ban chokeholds and require police officers to intervene against the use of...
excessive force by other officers, and voted an intent to restructure the police department as a "new community-based system of public safety".
The Minneapolis Police Chief canceled contract negotiations with the police union and announced plans to bring in outside experts to examine how the union contract can be restructured to provide transparency and "flexibility for true reform".
== People involved ==\nGeorge Perry Floyd (aged 46) was born in Fayetteville, North Carolina, and raised in the Third Ward of Houston, Texas. In 2014, he moved to the Minneapolis, Minnesota area. Though he resided in the nearby suburb of St.
Louis Park, he was a frequent customer at the Cup Foods convenience store in south Minneapolis. Derek Michael Chauvin (age 44) had been a police officer in the Minneapolis Police Department since 2001.
Chauvin and Floyd sometimes worked overlapping shifts as security guards for a local nightclub, but the club's former owner was unsure of the extent to which they knew each other.
Tou Thao (age 34) started as a part-time community service officer in 2008 and graduated from the police academy in 2009. After a two-year layoff he resumed work for the police in 2012. Six complaints had been filed against Thao, none resulting in disciplinary action.
In 2014, a man claimed Thao handcuffed him without cause, threw him to the ground, and punched, kicked, and kneed him; the man's teeth were broken and he was hospitalized. The resulting lawsuit was settled for $25,000.
James Alexander Kueng (age 26) and Thomas Kiernan Lane (age 37) were licensed as law enforcement officers in August 2019. Kueng and Lane had trained together, and were in their first week as Minneapolis police officers when Floyd was killed.
Chauvin was the superior officer responsible for the majority of Kueng's field training. Thao is Hmong-American, Kueng identifies as African-American, and Chauvin and Lane are white.
== Arrest and death ==\n=== Initial events ===\nOn the evening of Memorial Day, May 25, 2020, Floyd purchased cigarettes at Cup Foods, a grocery store at the intersection of East 38th Street and Chicago Avenue in the Powderhorn Park neighborhood of Minneapolis.
A store employee believed Floyd had paid with a counterfeit $20 bill. Just before 8:00 pm, two Cup Foods employees left the store and crossed the street to an SUV parked in front of a restaurant; Floyd was in the driver's seat and two other adults were in the vehicle.
1:25 - 1:33 The employees demanded that Floyd return the cigarettes, and he refused. 1:43 The interaction was filmed by the restaurant's security camera.
0:49 - 1:24 At 8:01, a store employee called police to report that Floyd had passed "fake bills" and was "awfully drunk" and "not in control of himself". 1:33 - 1:51 At 8:08, Kueng and Lane arrived, briefly entering Cup Foods before crossing the street to Floyd's SUV.
1:41 - 2:00 Lane drew his gun and ordered Floyd to show his hands; when Floyd complied, Lane holstered his weapon. Someone parked behind Floyd's SUV began recording a video at 8:10.
1:56 - 2:28 Following a brief struggle,:2:10 Lane pulled Floyd from the SUV and handcuffed him. 2:20 At 8:12, Kueng sat Floyd on the sidewalk against the wall in front of the restaurant.
2:22 - 2:33 Lane asked Floyd if he is "on something right now", and Floyd replied "No, nothing". Kueng told Floyd he was acting "real erratic" and Floyd said that he was scared.
Kueng remarked that Floyd had foam around his mouth, and Floyd explained that he had been "hooping" earlier. According to criminal complaints filed against the officers by state prosecutors, Floyd was "calm" and said "thank you".
=== Chauvin kneels on Floyd's neck ===\nAt 8:13,2:30 Kueng and Lane told Floyd he was under arrest and walked him to their police car across the street. Floyd fell to the ground next to the car; the officers picked him up and placed him against the car's door.
2:42 - 3:00 According to prosecutors, Floyd told the officers that he was not resisting, but that he was recovering from COVID-19, that he was claustrophobic and suffered from anxiety, and that he did not want to sit in the car.
3:10 While Kueng and Lane attempted to put him in the car, Floyd begged them not to, repeatedly saying "I can't breathe" and offering to lie on the ground instead.
During his interview with crime investigators, Lane said that he first saw Floyd bleeding from the mouth at that moment, which he attributed to his "thrashing back and forth, in the car and hitting his face on the glass that goes to the front seat.
A Minneapolis Park Police officer arrived and guarded Floyd's vehicle (across the street by the restaurant) and the two people who had been in it with Floyd.
2:53 At 8:17, Derek Michael Chauvin and Tou Thao arrived in a third police car joining Kueng and Lane:3:32:3:27 with Chauvin assuming command. He asked if Floyd was going to jail, and Kueng replied that he was arrested for forgery.
Floyd said "I can't fucking breathe" twice. Around 8:18, security footage from Cup Foods shows Kueng struggling with Floyd for at least a minute in the driver side backseat while Thao watches.
3:54 - 3:49 At 8:19, standing on the passenger side of the vehicle, Chauvin pulled Floyd across the backseat from the driver side to the passenger side, then out of the car.
3:56 Floyd, still handcuffed, fell to the pavement where he lay on his chest with his cheek to the ground. Floyd stopped moving around 8:20, though he was still conscious.
4:10 Multiple witnesses began to film the encounter, and their videos were circulated widely on the internet.
4:06 At 8:20, a witness across the street began recording video showing Chauvin kneeling on Floyd's neck, Kueng applying pressure to Floyd's torso, and Lane applying pressure to Floyd's legs, while Thao stood nearby.
4:13 - 4:11 This witness stopped filming when one of the officers ordered him to leave. 4:35 Also at 8:20, a second person, standing near the entrance of Cup Foods, began recording the incident.
4:26 - 5:08 Floyd can be heard repeatedly saying "I can't breathe", "Please", and "Mama";:4:44:4:28 Lane then asked for an ambulance for Floyd, "for one bleeding from the mouth". Floyd repeated at least 16 times that he could not breathe.
5:46 At one point a witness said: "You got him down. Let him breathe." After Floyd said, "I'm about to die", Chauvin told him to "relax". An officer asked Floyd, "What do you want?"; Floyd answered, "I can't breathe".
Floyd said, "Please, the knee in my neck, I can't breathe." At approximately 8:22, the officers called for an ambulance on a non-emergency basis, escalating the call to emergency status a minute later. 4:50 - 4:42 Chauvin continued to kneel on Floyd's neck.
5:15 A passerby yelled to Floyd, "Well, get up, get in the car, man", and Floyd, still handcuffed and face down on the pavement, responded, "I can't", while Chauvin's knee remained on his neck. 5:26 Floyd cried out "Mama!" twice.
Floyd said, "My stomach hurts, my neck hurts, everything hurts", requested water, and begged, "Don't kill me." One witness pointed out that Floyd was bleeding from the nose. Another told the officers that Floyd was "not even resisting arrest right now".
Thao countered that Floyd was "talking, he's fine". A witness replied that Floyd "ain't fine ... Get him off the ground ... You could have put him in the car by now. He's not resisting arrest or nothing. You're enjoying it. Look at you. Your body language explains it."
As Floyd continued to cry for help, Thao said to witnesses: "This is why you don't do drugs, kids." By 8:25, Floyd appeared unconscious, and bystanders confronted the officers about Floyd's condition.
Chauvin pulled out mace to keep bystanders away as Thao moved between them and Chauvin. Bystanders repeatedly yelled that Floyd was "not responsive right now" and urged the officers to check his pulse.
5:22 - 6:53 Kueng checked Floyd's wrist but found no pulse; the officers did not attempt to provide Floyd with medical assistance.
6:46 According to the criminal complaint against Chauvin, Lane asked Chauvin twice if they should move Floyd onto his side, and Chauvin said no.
7:02 A witness asked, "Did they fucking kill him?" === Medical response and death ===\nAt 8:27 pm, a Hennepin County ambulance arrived. 5:56 - 7:11 Shortly thereafter, a young relative of the owner of Cup Foods attempted to intervene, but was pushed back by Thao.
6:03 Emergency medical technicians checked Floyd's pulse. 7:17 Chauvin kept his knee on Floyd's neck for almost a minute after the ambulance arrived, despite Floyd being silent and motionless.
7:21 When he finally did lift his knee, it had been there for seven minutes and forty-six seconds. 6:27 - 7:28Around 8:29, Floyd was lifted by paramedics onto a stretcher, then loaded into an ambulance which departed for Hennepin County Medical Center.
6:35 - 7:43 En route, the ambulance requested assistance from the Minneapolis Fire Department.
6:35 - 7:43 At 8:32, firefighters arrived at Cup Foods;:6:56:7:56 according to their report, the police officers gave no clear information regarding Floyd's condition or whereabouts, which delayed their ability to find the ambulance.
7:56 Meanwhile, the ambulance reported that Floyd was entering cardiac arrest and again requested assistance, asking firefighters to meet them at the corner of 36th Street and Park Avenue.
Five minutes later, the fire department reached the ambulance;:8:10 two fire department medics who boarded the ambulance found Floyd unresponsive and pulseless. 6:56 Floyd was pronounced dead at 9:25 at the Hennepin County Medical Center emergency room. 7:12 - 8:28
== Investigations and criminal charges ==\n=== Minneapolis police response ===\nEarly on May 26, the Minneapolis Police Department issued a statement ("Man Dies After Medical Incident During Police Interaction")...
which said nothing about Chauvin kneeling on Floyd's neck: "After Floyd got out [of his car], he physically resisted officers.
Officers were able to get the suspect into handcuffs and noted he appeared to be suffering medical distress.
Hours later, after witness and security camera video circulating on the internet contradicted that account, the department updated its statement, calling...
its earlier statement preliminary, and stating that new information had "been made available" and that the FBI was joining the investigation.
The four officers were briefly placed on paid administrative leave before being fired later that day.
=== Autopsies ===\nA criminal complaint against Chauvin, issued May 29, cited preliminary results of an autopsy conducted by the Hennepin County medical examiner, which found "no...
physical findings that support a diagnosis of traumatic asphyxia or strangulation", but found that Floyd suffered from coronary artery disease and hypertensive heart disease.
The complaint cited the preliminary opinion that the "combined effects of Mr.Floyd being restrained by the police, his underlying health conditions and any potential intoxicants in his system likely contributed to his death".
The medical examiner's final findings, issued June 1, classified Floyd's death as a homicide caused by "a cardiopulmonary arrest while being restrained" by officers who had subjected Floyd to "neck compression".
Other significant conditions were arteriosclerotic heart disease, hypertensive heart disease, fentanyl intoxication, and recent methamphetamine use.
The report states that on April 3 Floyd had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, but does not list it as a fatal or other significant condition.
Floyd's family commissioned a second autopsy, carried out by Michael Baden, a pathologist and former New York City chief medical examiner who...
had autopsied Eric Garner, and attended by Allecia Wilson, director of autopsy and forensic services at the University of Michigan Medical School.
He found that the "evidence is consistent with mechanical asphyxia as the cause of Floyd's death", and that the death was a homicide.
He said Floyd died from "asphyxia due to compression of the neck", affecting "blood flow and oxygen going into the brain", and also from "compression of the back, which interferes with breathing".
He said Floyd had no underlying medical problem that caused or contributed to his death, and that being able to speak does not mean that someone is able to breathe.
Neither examiner mentioned excited delirium, a condition which concerned Lane and that he discussed with Chauvin while Floyd was pinned down.
=== State investigations and criminal charges ===\nOn May 29, 2020, Chauvin was charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter, and held at Oak Park Heights state prison.
According to the criminal complaint, police are trained that the neck restraint that he applied "with a subject in prone position is inherently dangerous."
On June 3, 2020, the charge against Chauvin was upgraded to second-degree murder, and the three other officers were charged with aiding and abetting second-degree murder.
On June 10, Lane was released on bail; his attorney asserted that he warned Chauvin of the danger of severe harm to Floyd, and that doing so was all that was required under Minneapolis police regulations at the time.
On June 19, Kueng became the second charged officer to be released on bail. Thao then followed suit on July 4. On June 17 the Minnesota Board of Peace Officer Standards and Training took up a review of the four officers' law-enforcement licenses.
On June 29 the presiding judge in the case indicated that continued public comments on the case, by defense attorneys or public officials, were likely to lead to the case being transferred to another county.
=== Federal investigations ===\nOn May 26, the FBI announced it was reviewing the incident at the request of the Minneapolis Police Department.
On May 28, the United States Department of Justice released a joint statement with the FBI, saying that their investigation into Floyd's death was "a top priority" and outlining the investigation's next steps:
a "comprehensive investigation will compile all available information and thoroughly evaluate evidence and information obtained from witnesses... If it is determined that there has been a violation of federal law, criminal charges will be sought".
According to some commentators, the statement was considered stronger than usual as the department often had a more muted tone.
=== Failed plea bargain agreement ===\nOn May 28, state and federal prosecutors held a press conference at a regional FBI office in Brooklyn Center, a Minneapolis suburb...
in what was anticipated to be a major development to the case against the officers who were at the scene of Floyd's death.
However, Hennepin County Attorney Michael O. Freeman, the local official with jurisdiction to bring forth criminal charges for police misconduct, said his office needed more time to investigate.
In explaining the anticipation of the media briefing and its two-hour delayed start, U.S. Attorney Erica MacDonald said, "I thought we would have another development to talk to you about, but we don’t".
Weeks later, on June 9, it was revealed that state and federal prosecutors were negotiating a plea deal with former officer Derek Chauvin ...
that would have included state murder charges and federal civil rights charges, but the deal fell apart for reasons that were not fully explained.
=== State civil rights action ===\nThe Minnesota Department of Human Rights opened an investigation into the practices of the Minneapolis Police Department on June 2.
On June 5, the Minneapolis City Council authorized the mayor to enter a restraining order with the State of Minnesota banning chokeholds and neck restraints, requiring police officers to...
intervene against other officers' use of excessive force, and requiring authorization from the police chief or other designate before using crowd-control weapons such as chemical agents and rubber bullets.
On June 8, a Hennepin County Court judge ordered the Minneapolis Police Department to cooperate with a civil rights investigation, and extended the restrictions on the department to require that the chief make discipline...
decisions in a timely and transparent manner, and that certain outside investigators be given authority to audit body-worn camera footage and to file or amend complaints on behalf of the Minneapolis Civil Rights Department.
=== Civil litigation ===\nThe family of George Floyd filed a lawsuit in federal court against the City of Minneapolis and the Minneapolis Police Department in July 2020.
The complaint said Floyd's Fourth Amendment rights were violated by "excessive use of unjustified, excessive, illegal, and deadly force." The lawsuit did not specify the amount of monetary damages the family sought.
== Memorials, protests and reactions ==\nThe area near the location where Floyd was killed became a makeshift memorial throughout May 26, with many placards paying tribute to him and referencing the Black Lives Matter movement.
As the day progressed, more people came to demonstrate against Floyd's death. Hundreds of people, then marched to the 3rd Precinct of the Minneapolis Police.
Participants used posters and slogans with phrases such as "Justice for George", "I can't breathe", and "Black Lives Matter".
Unrest began in local protests in the Minneapolis–Saint Paul area before quickly spreading nationwide and in over 60 countries internationally supporting Black Lives Matter. Over 2,000 cities in the US have seen demonstrations as of June 13.
While the majority of protests have been peaceful, demonstrations in some cities descended into riots and looting, with more being marked by street skirmishes and significant police brutality, notably against peaceful protesters and reporters.
At least 200 cities in the U.S. had imposed curfews by June 3, while more than 30 states and Washington, D.C, activated over 62,000 National Guard personnel due to the mass unrest.
The protests were initially peaceful, but later there was vandalism of stores; at the 3rd Precinct police station windows were broken and fires set.
Police in riot gear used tear gas, flash grenades, rubber bullets and smoke bombs, and some protesters threw rocks at the police.
The media highlighted the apparent differences in aggression between the police response to these protests versus the more measured response to the 2020 United States anti-lockdown protests featuring gun-wielding white protesters. This sentiment also spread on social media.
While peaceful protests continued, others again became violent after sundown, with the pattern repeating for several days. As of June 9, the Star Tribune estimated 570 businesses in the Minneapolis–St.
Paul area had been vandalized or destroyed, including 67 destroyed by fire.
Following the rioting, a nighttime curfew in Minneapolis–Saint Paul and Dakota County was established on May 29.500 Minnesota National Guard soldiers were later dispatched to...
the area to enforce the curfew, but to little effect, with about 1,000 protesters being able to march peacefully on Interstate 35 well into curfew.
A public memorial, with Al Sharpton delivering the eulogy, was held June 4 at North Central University in Minneapolis. A public viewing and a family memorial was held in Raeford, North Carolina on June 6, near Floyd's hometown.
Floyd's family held a public memorial in Houston on June 8, and a private service on June 9. The family said professional boxer Floyd Mayweather paid for the services. Floyd's body was on public view on June 8 in his hometown of Houston.
Former Vice President and the 2020 Democratic nominee, Joe Biden, met with the Floyd family privately and gave a video message at the funeral. Floyd is buried next to his mother in Pearland, Texas.
Protests demanding justice for George Floyd, in some cases also to demonstrate against issues with police brutality in their own countries, took place in over 2,000 cities in the US and around the world, including New York City; Los Angeles...
 Chicago; Toronto; Mashhad; Milan; Columbus, Ohio; Denver; Des Moines; Houston; Louisville; Memphis; Charlotte, North Carolina...
Oakland; Portland, Oregon; San Jose; Seattle; outside the White House in Washington; outside Chauvin's summer home in Windermere, Florida; and in many other locations.
On May 30, 12 states called up the National Guard, and at least 12 major cities imposed curfews that weekend.
By June 14, protests had extended into a third week after Floyd's death in many cities, accompanied by calls to reform and defund police departments throughout the United States.
The length of time that Chauvin was originally reported to have had his knee on Floyd's neck, eight minutes forty-six seconds, was widely commemorated as a "moment of silence" to honor Floyd.
It was also used in chants, protest signs, and messages, as were the words "I can't breathe".
Numerous statues and monuments honoring persons or events associated with slavery and racism, in the US and elsewhere, were vandalized, removed, or destroyed during the protests (see List of monuments and memorials removed during the George Floyd protests).
Conspiracy theories began spreading soon after Floyd's death.
